# Abstract

Sequence alignment is often used for similarity determinations. Algorithms
implementing sequence alignment are abundant and widely used; the paper
describing BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool algorithm) is one of the
most-cited tools in biology with over 70,000 citations. However, in cases of low
sequence homology, horizontal gene transfer, or lack of *a priori* information -
common with pathogenic bacteria - alignment-based methods can have performance
issues.

We introduce Sequence Non-Alignment Compression Comparison (SNACC), a pipeline
employing the Normalized Compression Distance (NCD) and clustering in an
alignment-free pairwise sequence comparison method. NCD is a parameter-free
metric that uses compression algorithms to estimate similarity. These algorithms
leverage input signal redundancies to reduce the file size encoding the signal.
Similar strings contain more redundancies, resulting in a better compression
score. NCD has been used in diverse applications, such as in [classifying
musical genres of mp3 files](https://homepages.cwi.nl/~paulv/papers/music.pdf),
[scanning Android files for
viruses](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11416-015-0260-0) and
[natural language processing](http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P10-2015).
However, there are no existing tools applying NCD in biological datasets.

We investigated the use of 6 common compression algorithms on bacterial and
viral nucleotide data sets with varying degrees of sequence similarity and found
that only those distance matrices generated by the Lempel–Ziv–Markov chain
algorithm (LZMA) were significantly similar to the benchmark test (Mantel p <
0.01). We created an intuitive command line interface to perform LZMA
compression followed by clustering using any of 7 common user-specified
clustering algorithms.
